---
title: Acknowledgments
layout: page
order: 20020
classes:
  - backmatter-page
  - scores-acknowledgments-page
---

A project of this scope and ambition could not have come to fruition without the dedication and brilliance of many people whose outstanding collaborative efforts have been crucial at every stage. The editors would like to acknowledge the early contributions of Getty Research Institute Publications staff Michele Ciaccio, Janelle Gatchalian, and especially Gail Feigenbaum, who first hatched the idea of featuring experimental scores in a multimedia digital format. We remain in awe of the herculean imaging efforts of Ted Walbye, Peter Dueker, Taylor Branham, Sophie Chen-Iveson, Michael Smith, Johana Herrera, Steve DeFurio, and many others over the years. Our thanks also to Victoria Barry, Audrey Warne, Dina Murokh, Chloe Millhauser, and Kate Justement for the hours they spent tracking down and cataloging the project’s rich trove of objects in preparation for imaging. Likewise, Karen Ehrmann and Pauline Lopez acquired images and permissions with admirable professionalism and grace. We thank manuscript editor Lisa Marietta for her indefatigable attention to detail, Molly McGeehan for her important role in the project’s production, and digital assistants Jenny Park and Alex Hallenbeck for their decisive contributions. The project was supported by additional research assistance from Kathryn Huether, Zach Rottman, and Anna Smith, along with expert guidance and aid from Sarah Cooper, Megan Metcalf, Marcia Reed, Nancy Perloff, Emily Ruth Capper, Tashi Wada, Judith Rodenbeck, and Peggy Phelan. Following Eric Gardner’s early prototyping and design work, which helped set us on the right path, project designers Andrew LeClair and E Roon Kang of 908A crafted a smart and rigorous design that packages these complex intermedial texts and objects in a remarkably elegant way, for which we are grateful.

We are appreciative of additional funding provided by the National Endowment for the Humanities–Mellon Fellowship in Digital Publication, the National Endowment for the Humanities Summer Stipend, the McKnight Foundation, the College of Liberal Arts at the University of Minnesota, and the Kathrine G. McGovern College of the Arts and Division of Research at the University of Houston. 

Two team members in particular deserve extended praise. We are deeply thankful for the efforts of project editor Adriana Romero, whose keen eye on the project in its final stages have enabled the content to shine. Our appreciation and admiration for digital publications manager Greg Albers, who has guided and championed this project from beginning to end, is beyond measure. Greg brought an extraordinary combination of vision, optimism, good nature, savvy, intelligence, and pragmatism to this project, which established the foundation on which all other collaborations became possible. Lastly, we express our profound gratitude to the artists and contributors for generously sharing their archives and expertise, and for the patience and faith that they and our families invested in this project over its extended development. 
