---
title: Commentary
score: Concert for Piano and Orchestra (1968)
artist: John Cage
order: 21
layout: essay
toc: false
menu: false
contributor:
  - id: mgallope
  - id: nperloff
---

John Cage’s *Concert for Piano and Orchestra* (1958) is unique among his output in its association not only with Cage the composer but also with David Tudor’s extensive role in realizing and performing the part of the *Concert* for the solo pianist, which Cage titled the *Solo for Piano*. What, might we ask, is so unusual and unprecedented about the *Concert*’s *Solo for Piano*, and how do we understand its great appeal for Tudor?

To begin, the *Solo for Piano* represented, at the time, Cage’s most elaborate and complex use of indeterminacy in performance. As he put it in his “Indeterminacy” lecture, the second of three talks delivered under the title “Composition as Process” in Darmstadt, Germany, in September 1958:

> A performance of a composition which is indeterminate of its performance is necessarily unique. It cannot be repeated. When performed a second time, the outcome is other than it was. Nothing is accomplished by such a performance, since that performance cannot be grasped as an object in time.[^1]

To make compositions that reflected these ideals, Cage developed complex and visually striking notations that distanced performers from the intention-driven principles that had heretofore guided Western music. As James Pritchett has argued, the crucial principles of indeterminacy were (1) *experimental*—involving actions with unforeseen outcomes such that a performance “cannot be repeated” or “grasped as an object”; (2) *purposeless*—as in a “purposeless process” that gives rise to “no matter what eventuality,” in which “nothing is accomplished”; and (3) *unknowing*—“by employing some operation exterior to \[the performer’s\] mind.”[^2] All were central to Cage’s work after 1950, which was recognized for its experimental procedures that resulted in unique and unpredictable events, for its commitment to the “purposeless” quality of a music divorced from the aims of individual expression, and for its Zen-infused philosophy that grounded Cage’s compositional technique in the impersonal forces of nature.[^3] If Cage’s above philosophical principles are well known, it is less often remarked that Tudor played a crucial role in the development of Cage’s turn to indeterminacy. As it was for Tudor and Feldman (see [chapter 1](/01/)), the meeting of Tudor and Cage ([fig. 2.1](#fig-2-1) shows them together while on tour in Japan in 1962) was auspicious. On 17 December 1950, in New York, Tudor had given the American premiere of Pierre Boulez’s *Second Sonata* (1948), a technically demanding piece that extended the dissonant atonality associated with composers such as Arnold Schoenberg and Anton Webern into a highly aggressive, large-scale composition. As a result of this premiere, Tudor began to develop a reputation as an exceptionally talented performer of difficult modern music, a reputation that would prove significant to the notoriety of the postwar musical avant-garde. Cage, who turned pages for Tudor at the premiere, was himself electrified by the performance. The following year, Cage, feeling inspired, embarked on a monumental solo piano work for Tudor titled *Music of Changes*.[^4] Recalling their early collaboration, Cage noted:

> In all my works since 1952, I have tried to achieve what would seem interesting and vibrant to David Tudor. Whatever succeeds in the works I have done has been determined in relationship to him. . . . Tudor was present in everything I was doing. . . . At that time \[1951\], he *was* the *Music of Changes.*[^5]

{% fig 'fig-2-1' %}

Tudor learned each section of *Music of Changes* as soon as Cage completed it, thus confirming that the notation was playable. The correspondence between the two offers a vivid chronicle of their collaboration. A letter from Tudor to Cage in late July 1951 questions and seeks to verify numerous technical details with respect to pedaling:

> A few things I would like to check: . . . what are the exact functions you had in mind for the pedals . . . ; what about the inclusion in the pedals of the graces D + A p. 5 4s. \[4^th^ system\]; are the 4 16ths top p. 6 correct (I hope so!); to which group does the 2^nd^ ½ pedal belong p.7 3s. 1m., ffff or ppp-pppp . . . . I have revised the pedaling considerably, we’ll see how you like it.

Cage’s reply on 5 August 1951 ([fig. 2.2](#fig-2-2)) shows not only the depth of Cage’s personal attachment (“Your letter has given me much pleasure, how much exactly I cannot say as I’ve lost count of the number of times I’ve reread it”) but also Cage’s technical vigilance in addressing every detailed question Tudor had posed*.*

{% fig 'fig-2-2' %}

In Tudor’s intimate but assertive queries, one gets a sense of a person attuned to detail, not merely one who is capable of serving as an interpreter but someone keen on making significant musical choices on his own. In his preface to *Music of Changes*, Cage concluded that such a bond of trust had become necessary in order that Tudor would be able to decipher the complex score he had devised: “It will be found in many places that the notation is irrational; in such instances the performer is to employ his own discretion.”[^6]

At the end of his letter to Tudor, Cage writes that a performance of *Music of Changes* should be guided by a principle of radical discontinuity: “The guiding principle for performance should be to act so that each action is itself (that means infinitely different and incomparable, single, never before or later to occur, so that each moment makes history).”[^7] Cage’s statement is emblematic of his famous turn during this same year—1951—to chance operations. In preparing *Music of Changes* for Tudor, Cage created a chart of various sounds (single notes, two pitches, chords, larger constellations of pitches, and silences), a set of possible durations, and a chart of different dynamic values. A toss of coins determined numbers that corresponded to hexagrams in the *I Ching*, the ancient Chinese divination text that was translated into English as *Book of Changes*. Such hexagrams in turn pointed to different combinations of sounds, durations, and dynamics that Cage would then sequence together in the score.

While the compositional process was chance-based, *Music of Changes* is a fully notated score that remains relatively fixed from one performance to the next.[^8] As his chance-derived compositions developed in the 1950s, Cage expanded upon his aesthetic of non-intentionality by inventing a wealth of more-or-less indeterminate musical notations. For the *Solo for Piano*, he devised visually complex *graphs* (as he called them) that gave Tudor room to interpret imaginative hand-drawn diagrams, navigate ambiguous and often convoluted instructions, make choices about which graphs to play and when, and, in some instances, determine what to play by using secondary calculations or realizations. Some of the *Solo for Piano*’s graphs were entirely new; others Cage reworked from scores from the 1950s, including the *Music for Piano* series (1952–56), *Winter Music* (1957), and *Variations I* (1958), all of which were written for Tudor. This sheet of the score shows two of Cage’s graphs for the *Solo for Piano*, each identified by a letter of the alphabet (*D* and *Z*) ([fig. 2.3](#fig-2-3)).

{% fig 'fig-2-3' %}

In all, the *Solo for Piano* contains eighty-four graphs distributed across sixty-three pages, with some graphs stretching over two or three pages. Cage deliberately chose this multiplicity and this maximal information to diffuse his own compositional agency and to produce a highly abstract and esoteric composition, devoid of traditionally expressive audible patterns and repetitions. The resultant stack of pages is also a complex physical object—something like a thick deck of cards, but where the cards measure 11 inches by 17 inches. For this reason, the sheets are nearly impossible to view as a totality. Physically handling the score—shuffling it, recombining it, marveling at its many intricacies—these actions mirror, from a visual and tactile perspective, the indeterminacy of the work.

This indeterminacy is reflected outside the solo part as well. A traditional score reads from left to right and can be bound in a fixed order like a book, but Cage’s *Concert* has no full orchestral score, only separate parts—the sixty-three pages of the *Solo for Piano*, thirteen instrumental parts, and a separate part for the conductor. The instrumental parts are each twelve pages in length and feature isolated note heads that indicate individual attacks, many of which are subject to extended techniques (for example, playing with open spit valves, disconnecting tuning slides, slapping keys, singing or gurgling through an instrument, and so on). Cage left the timing open and allowed his performers to play any, all, or none of the notations in the score. Meanwhile, the conductor’s part calls for, among other instructions, circling one’s arms in order to keep clock time for an agreed-upon performance length. This role was first performed by dancer and choreographer Merce Cunningham, who served as conductor for the premiere on 15 May 1958, at New York’s Town Hall ([fig. 2.4](#fig-2-4)).

{% fig 'fig-2-4' %}

In a manner that mirrors his realizations for Feldman’s graph-paper scores of the early 1950s ([see [chapter 1](file:///1)]{.mark}), Tudor devised detailed realizations of the graphs in the *Solo for Piano* for the 1958 premiere, and he invented a visual notation that mixed traditional musical notation with his own customized system ([see [score tab](file:///2#score)]{.mark}). In preparing his realizations, Tudor began by making sketches of individual graphs in pencil, and then he copied them into polished performance scores on small card stock manuscript paper. Finally, he assembled sequences of the graphs that would conform to agreed-upon lengths of time for a given performance. The result was a relatively conventional performance score with a determined length.

In the [[Playback tab]{.mark}](file:///2#playback) for this chapter, you can find a variety of items that correspond to Tudor’s realization of Cage’s *Solo for Piano*. Among them is a curated selection of Cage’s graphs—graphs J, K, T, AY, and CE—which were chosen because they exemplified both Tudor’s pianistic virtuosity and Cage’s compositional and notational intricacy. In each of these items, Cage’s original graph is included along with its instructions, and these are paired with Tudor’s corresponding realization for the 1958 premiere. (Tudor’s realization is notable for its almost theatrical foregrounding of his pianism; listen for the various extended techniques he invented.) Red boxes, as part of Tudor’s devised notation, indicate what he is realizing and playing in each of Cage’s graphs. By way of a simple animation, the aim of the animation design was to make the esoteric notations accessible to users who may have only a limited familiarity with traditional Western musical notation. In addition to these five curated graphs, we have included in the Playback tab a flipbook that features the entire performance of Tudor’s first realization. In real time as Tudor is performing, the flipbook simultaneously opens the corresponding graphs from Cage’s *Solo for Piano* and from Tudor’s corresponding realization.

Following the first performances of the *Concert*, Tudor produced a second and far sparser realization of the *Solo for Piano* in 1959. **\[[Link to Second Realization flipbook]{.mark}\]** Tudor’s process for creating this second realization was probably the most labor intensive of any of his realizations of Cage’s scores. Tudor culled all the single attacks from his first realization and, using a second run of chance procedures, spread them out into a vast, deserted, nearly silent, and impersonal landscape of ninety minutes. Tudor fastidiously transcribed these various attacks into a performance score in proportional notation, a notation without traditional meter or rhythm in which a designated length of a staff in space corresponds to a particular duration (in this case, each page was equal to one minute) ([fig. 2.5](#fig-2-5)). The result is far less virtuosic than the first realizations. Cage and Tudor used this second realization for their landmark recording *Indeterminacy* (1959), which featured stories read by Cage at varying speed alongside Tudor’s performance of the solo.

{% fig 'fig-2-5' %}

Here are two entirely different realizations of the same work—two among many other possible realizations. It is the kind of open-endedness that could easily cause philosophers to puzzle over the fundamental questions of a work’s ontology. In his landmark book *Languages of Art* (1968), philosopher Nelson Goodman picks out the most indeterminate of Cage’s graphs in the *Solo for Piano* to question the limits of a performer’s compliance to the symbolic capacities of the musical score.[^9] Goodman’s prescriptions for notation are exacting. His analysis of graph BB states that Cage’s instructions for measuring the distances of the five perpendiculars lack a precise unit and are thus too ambiguous to be properly notational. But philosophers were not the only ones to debate the work’s porous and ambiguous ontology. In newspaper reviews of the *Concert* [\[LINK\]]{.mark}, one can find middlebrow critics trying their own hand at grappling with the oddity of such a piece. Reviewers, not always interested in the esotericism of chance procedures, often focused on the sensory impact of Cage’s works from the 1950s, associating it with violence, wrestling matches, psychosis, childlike outbursts, or even the advent of a nihilistic age.

Far from being considered controversial reviews, however, such receptions of Cage’s works (including others featured in *The Scores Project*) could be read as a reflection of the powerful influence of Antonin Artaud’s “Theater of Cruelty” on both Tudor and Cage during the 1950s—an avant-garde aesthetic exemplified by the non-normative, violent, and destructive carnality of life, and remembered widely for its impact on performance art at midcentury. Artaud’s influence on their collaboration was significant; it came first through Tudor, via his preparation for the American premiere of Boulez’s *Second Sonata* (a work that was itself inspired by Artaud), and was further developed by Cage in the dissonant landscape of *Music of Changes*, as well as through the multisensory disorder of the famous 1952 “happening” at Black Mountain College that came to be known as *Theater Piece No. 1*. With this in mind, we invite users to contemplate these reviews not as evidence of the *Concert*’s history of controversial reception but as part of an extended ontology of a multifaceted work that is as often legislated and decided by critics, audiences, and various compliant or disobedient collaborators as it would be by a philosopher. In other words, the fact that people disagreed about the music’s significance is, in our view, essential to the identity of the indeterminate work; what makes it striking and successful is that the *Concert* continued to serve as a magnet for audiences, artists, dancers, and many others alike.

Beyond the newspaper reviews, we’ve included a variety of other materials pertinent to Cage’s *Concert*. This includes Tudor’s sketches for his realizations of each of the curated graphs as well as various sequences of the graphs for his versions of the first realization for performances of different lengths, many of which were designed to mesh structural clock time with dances by Merce Cunningham. (In particular, the *Concert* was performed between 1958 and 1960 to accompany Cunningham’s vaudevillian work *Antic Meet*.) For these performances, Tudor, like Cage, re-sequenced his existing realizations of individual graphs to meet the agreed-upon time length for Cunningham’s dance. \[**[Link to Tudor’s sequencing charts in the Archive tab.]{.mark}\]** We’ve also included a selection of pertinent correspondence between Tudor, Cage, and M. C. Richards, who was Tudor’s partner during the period and a translator of Artaud’s writings into English **\[[Link to Tudor’s correspondence with Richards.]{.mark}\]** Indeed, this reminds us that given the varied audiences of Cage’s seminal works from midcentury, the *Concert* should be read not simply toward a pious view of what constitutes a correct performance of Cage’s work but in the full richness of its provocative multiplicity, and in a way that crosses the boundaries of different media.

## Notes {.notes-heading}

[^1]: John Cage, *Silence: Lectures and Writings by John Cage* (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1961), 39.

[^2]: Cage, “Indeterminacy” (1958), in idem, *Silence: Lectures and Writings by John Cage* (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1961), 38–39. For Pritchett’s account, see James Pritchett, *The Music of John Cage* (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press), 76–78.

[^3]: For a critical view of Cage’s claims to have channeled the forces of nature, see Benjamin Piekut, “Chance and Certainty: John Cage’s Politics of Nature,” *Cultural Critique*, no. 84 (2013): 134–63.

[^4]: See, for example, Cage’s letter to Boulez on the day following the premiere of Boulez’s *Second Sonata*, in *The Selected Letters of John Cage*, ed. Laura Kuhn (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2016), 139–41.

[^5]: Daniel Charles, *For the Birds: John Cage in Conversation with Daniel Charles* (Boston: Marion Boyars Publishers Ltd, 1981), 178.

[^6]: John Cage, preface to *Music of Changes* (New York: Henmar Press, 1961).

[^7]: Martin Iddon, *John Cage and David Tudor: Correspondence on Interpretation and Performance* (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 2015), 21.

[^8]: See Pritchett, *Music of John Cage*, 108.

[^9]: Nelson Goodman, *Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols* (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1968), 187–90.
